Oh, where's my agenda just gone.
Uh, so we have Barry Coates from Mindful Money Up first.
Perfect. Thank you.
Good morning, Barry. Can you hear me all right?
Just need your, um, video and audio on.
Barry, can you hear me all right? We can see you on screen.
Just need your video and audio on.
We're off to a cracking start here
on a Monday morning at the races.
Andy foster's here in the shadows. Uh, welcome, Andy.
Um, Barry, can you hear me at all,
or can you miss Not in, not in the shadows at all.
I am trying to get the it to work though,
which has been bit challenging.
This sounds like you're not the only one. Oh, Barry. Yep.
Your audio's off.
Good. Can you hear me now?
Yeah, we can. Yeah, just are you able to turn video on or?
I, uh, my screen keeps on flashing on and off
and I, uh, I managed to unmute myself, but not
That's right. We can hear
you. Um,
and we've got you for about another nine minutes,
so perhaps just, um, get into your presentation
and if you wanna leave some time for questions at the end.
Sure. Great. So, um, thank you committee
for hearing this evidence.
Uh, uh, my name's Barry Cos.
I'm, I'm co CEO founder
and co CEO of a charity called Mindful Money that, uh,
operates within the final finance sector
and offers transparency to investors about what kind of, uh,
companies they invest in, in their KiwiSaver
or their retail funds.
So we're closely involved in, uh, uh, in both investment
and, and banking issues, uh,
but somewhat from an outsider's perspective,
rather than being one of the commercial entities.
So that gives us an interesting perspective on the industry.
Um, excuse me.
Uh, we don't support this bill, um, primarily
because we think that the, um, identification
of ESG with discriminatory policy on the basis of, of,
uh, uh, some kind of, uh, supposedly,
uh, uh, altruistic view misses the real point of,
of ESG, which is
that it is primarily a risk management tool,
and it's applied not only widely by the investment
and banking sector in New Zealand,
but internationally, um,
including in the UN principles of responsible investment
where there's over 120 trillion US dollars, uh,
under management from institutions that adhere
or, or have signed up to, um, principles for,
for ESG risk management.
So that seems to us to, to be kind
of squarely in the mainstream of financial practice
and increasingly managing risks such as climate risks,
uh, uh, material to the business
and, uh, can, can be demonstrated through evidence
of, uh, of past practice and,
and past returns for those who,
who are adopting ESG policies.
So, so this is not a, uh, I think not a,
a case of, of, uh, sort of woke behavior.
It's a, it's a case of,
of good financial management being, being applied.
Um, secondly, I I don't think it's good for,
for the users in the industry to have, uh, have,
uh, some applications of the SG policy being out ruled
and, and not others.
I think it's, uh, uh, it's an important tool
for the industry as a whole,
and it's important for users to be able
to have the consistency of policy across, uh,
across all uses.
I think it would be an extremely difficult policy to be able
to, to, uh, differentiate, uh, between when,
when it applies or, or not.
Uh, thirdly, I think it sets, uh, a kind
of dangerous precedent in terms of, of, uh, a judging
that certain financial policies, uh,
don't meet certain, uh, criteria.
Uh, I think that's fine when consumers make those
choices voluntarily.
I think it's a little bit different when regulators step in
and somewhat arbitrarily decide what's
permissible and what isn't.
Uh, and, and finally on, uh, uh, uh,
I think it represents a, uh, uh, an intrusion of legislation
into financial markets in a way that
that isn't really supported by the evidence.
So, so that's our submission, uh,
and I'm very happy to take questions.
Thanks, Bruce. Uh, first question is from,
uh, Ingrid Leary.
Thanks, uh, lovely to see you.
I'm wondering, given that normally we would expect, um,
parties that sit on the right to want free flowing markets
and minimize market intervention, what you make
of this incursion, as you've described it, a uh,
an unwarranted intrusion into the financial sector,
and you've called it an overreach.
Can you speak to what the possible agenda
behind this might be, given that it seems out of whack
with the political side that is, uh,
including this into the legislative program?
Thank you. Uh, thank you, OOD.
I, I can understand that, uh,
there is some concern about potential, uh, uh,
kind of differences of opinion on, on the application
of some principles in the finance sector, like,
like the ESG principles.
However, I think, you know, they, they are squarely in the,
in the wheelhouse of good, good, uh, financial practice.
And I think, um, the legislative overreach comes in terms
of, of it being unclear as to what the problem is that
potential legislation is trying to solve here.
And I think if we, uh, if we start, uh, um, uh,
how should I say, uh, um,
interventions without strong evidential support of a problem
with financial markets,
then we can get into a really difficult situation.
And, uh, so that's where, where, uh, the basis
of our concern about s of overreach.
Okay. Thank you. I've got a question from Andy Foster.
Yeah, look, thanks Barry. Um, we've had, uh, a number
of people who have,
or businesses that have, um, uh, said
that they've been denied banking services, uh,
for reasons which, um, let's say they're ESG reasons.
Now, obviously, you are arguing that they are, uh,
that is a sound commercial decision,
but when you take a whole, um, group of organizations,
and particularly the one that I'm thinking of, uh,
first instance is the, the petrol stations where banks say,
well, look, we are gonna get out of that business
by 2030 in which in fact we're gonna do progressively,
um, by 2030.
Isn't that in itself the thing that will, um,
effectively close those businesses down?
It's not an ESG thing.
And if, and if we did that across the board,
we closed pretty much the entire
vehicle sector down as well.
Um, what stage in the balance does, uh,
does the financial sector overreach itself
in making those judgements?
Um, Andy, I think that's a good question.
Thank you for it.
Um, I, I think the, the banks, uh, um, you know,
I have my problem with the banks,
but I actually think they're pretty smart on their research.
Uh, and I think they have done their research
around trends in the retailing of, um,
oil, oil and gas products, retailing of petrol and diesel.
I, I think they, uh, um, they have justifiable concerns
that this is an industry where there is a huge amount
of capital expenditure
and infrastructure, which is very hard to amortize as
volumes decline and volumes will decline.
You know, the international, A energy agency says it, uh,
that the, the, you know, all sorts
of research internationally says that the, the oil
and gas sector will peak
and decline at some stage in the next few years.
And when that decline comes, it may well be rapid, uh,
and prices may, may fall, as we saw during the COVID era
where oil prices actually went negative.
I think there are serious risks in the downstream retailing
sector for oil and gas.
I think what, what funds are,
what their finance sector is saying that banks are saying is
that they don't want to be holding that risk.
Now, the question is, so, so what if nobody wants to hold
that risk, then, then indeed, as you say,
there becomes a public policy problem.
But I don't think we're anywhere near there yet.
But if we were, if banks all ran down the same,
the same pathway as one
or two have chosen to do,
then we would be in that position, wouldn't we?
And we've got a vehicle fleet of four
and a half odd million vehicles, most
of which would then be completely useless
and ability to get around
and get around freight and all those sort of things.
So, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Um, we, we live in a world
where there's lots of different sources of finance and,
and, uh, I think it's pretty in incomprehensible to,
to understand that there wouldn't be a source of finance.
The problem is that they may have to pay a bit more for it.
You know, we we're in, we're in a, a world
where capital is mobile
and, you know, there's a very, very remote possibility
that somebody couldn't lay off their, their, their loans to,
to, um, their source of finance, to, to
some international entity, uh, uh,
but, you know, it's, uh, it's gonna cost 'em a bit more.
And that's, uh, that's the nature of the changes,
and it's the nature of the risks
associated with their business.
When the risk is higher, the price goes up. Thanks.
And so if, if they can't, can't get, uh, funding from,
from the major banks, then maybe they have
to pay a bit more from, from others.
Thanks, uh, Barry, we have met time,
so appreciate your submission this morning.
Um, members, it's just gonna be an updated agenda sent out.
There's a slight shift in some of the speakers.
Um, next we've got Dr. Anya Dale from the R-N-Z-S-P-C-A.
Um, just check. She's
Yes, thank you. And
We've got you for 10 minutes, but feel free to, you know,
finish a bit earlier and leave some room for questions.
Thank you. I also, um, so thank you very much
for having us speak today.
We're very excited and, and very pleased.
Um, and, um, joining me is Marie McNich,
who leads this piece of work for us.
So I'm going to hand over to her now to do our, um,
presentation, and then we will, um, both answer questions.
Thank you. Great ki committee. Thank you for having us.
Um, you can hear me right? Yep. Perfect. Yeah. Awesome.
Great. Um, so I'm just gonna go
through a few key points from our submission and, um, we'll
otherwise take it as red,
assume you've got it, um, in front of you.
Um, I'm not sure, we'll take full 10 minutes.
We'll see how we go, and hopefully there's some
time for questions at the end.
Uh, so just upfront, SPCA doesn't support, um, this bill
as currently drafted.
Um, we would want to see environmental, social,
and go governance or ESG aspects, uh, included.
Um, and for us, that includes animal welfare, obviously,
alongside things like climate change.
Um, and that would, uh, include, you know, we would want
to see financial institutions able to lend more favorably
to, um, to those sectors that are making transitions
or are moving, um, uh, towards, uh,
thinking more about ESG, for example.
Um, so there are a couple of key reasons that we think that,
firstly, I just wanted
to place animal welfare on your radar, I suppose, as,
as a legitimate ESG, um, risk.
Uh, so aligned with other things like climate change
and environmental aspects,
which I imagine you're hearing, um, more about today.
Um, animal welfare, uh, you know, in terms
of things like farming is, is valued by Kiwis, obviously.
We know that, uh, it's also valued by those
who buy our products overseas.
So, um, we've highlighted in our submission
that there are, uh, international institutions, for example,
um, who have, uh, established that
and some quite substantial reports.
Uh, they talk about animal welfare being part
of a sustainable future, for example.
Um, and we are thinking of things like the OECD guidelines,
uh, the World Organization for Animal Health
and the UN Environment Program have all written about this.
Um, animal welfare is also a legitimate financial risk.
So that, um, sort of invites confusion.
I suppose, if, if financial organizations are allowed
to make decisions on, on financial risk,
but not ESG, um, then
that doesn't really make sense to us.
Um, because if we think of things like investing in
certain farming practices like building, um, sheds
for colony cages in the industry, um, building sheds
for flowering crates, uh, in the pork industry,
investing in things like new live export ships, um,
you know, all of these things are uncertain.
Um, these are infrastructure
investments which cost millions.
They have lifespans of, you know, 20, 30 years
for a new shed, for example.
Um, and it is a responsible decision
to start thinking about whether things like that are going
to be acceptable in 30 years time.
Um, so
that is a, uh, to us that's more
of a financial risk management decision,
and it is a, a woke decision or an ESG decision, right?
They're not really separable.
Um, and so for that reason, the bill
as drafted doesn't really make a lot of sense to us.
The secondary reason, um, that I wanted to talk to, uh,
talk about today, um,
basically was about maybe some unintended consequences.
So, uh, organizations like ours, um,
like the environment NGOs that you might be hearing from,
obviously we're going to, um, keep doing the work that we do
and keep pushing for changes, right?
We're not going away, and we have a few different pathways
to push for changes over time.
Um, and one of them is, for example,
to call for changes to law.
Um, but also we, we work with businesses, we work
with farmers, we work with financial institutions, um,
and we try and see change by,
by applying consumer pressure, for example.
Um, and we've just seen in the past couple of months that,
uh, Sweden, for example, has announced
that they've effectively achieved a ban on all pages
and farming, and that's not through the law.
That was only through consumer pressure.
Um, and, you know, probably some, uh,
some investment into
transitions and things like that, right?
Uh, from US perspective, that's maybe a more gentle
or easier way to achieve that kind of change over time.
Um, you know, calling for a total ban on things like
that can be, um, disruptive, uh,
or, um, create a lot of pressure on industries.
Um, so basically just wanted to highlight
that if the government starts removing these tools, um,
of the free market, for example, to, to help
with transitions over time
or to provide more favorable investment, um,
to certain types of businesses, um, then
that basically leaves us pushing more towards things like
bans, total bans and colony cages or fair
and creates, um, which might create more sudden change.
Um, so those were the two major
points really I wanted to make.
Um, obviously happy to answer any questions, um,
and the rest of the submission as well.
Um, yeah, as, as summarized, SPCA recommends
that the bill is either withdrawn
or overhauled, um, to permit ESG based due diligence.
Uh, and we're, we're happy to take questions.
Thanks, Marie. Um, just a quick one for me.
In your submission, you talk about the, the barn free egg
and that 10 year, um, where is it there, um,
the 10 year battery cage transition and how by supporter
and future fit systems that could have actually, um,
helped stabilize in that?
Are you able to expand on that a little bit about
what you mean and what the risk is
with this bill that you see?
Um, yep. Anya, do you have any?
Yes. So basically without the oversight
of ESG that banks are able to make, um, it allows
for funding of, um, production systems
that are incredibly expensive to put in.
And there is often a timeline in relation to that
because society changes and what's acceptable does change.
So you can see, um, obviously the ban on, um,
uh, uh, original cages for, for layer hands, um,
did come in to, um, have a ban.
Yet all of these, um,
layer he farmers had invested heavily in that.
We've seen the same thing with colony cages now,
and yet colony cages
around the world are progressively having bans on them
because of the lack of chickens being able
to perform their natural behaviors.
Um, and so all
of these transitions are incredibly expensive.
Every shed is about a million dollars to transition.
So if they're able to, if farmers are able to have, um,
some banks having oversight of
what international trends are, it actually helps our farmers
and helps us meet our free trade agreement obligations.
Okay. Thank you, Andy.
We've got, um, just under two minutes to go.
You've got a question? Yeah,
Yeah. Look, thank you.
Um, two questions if I can.
Well let, let's start off the first one, just, so basically
what you're saying is that, uh, in your view,
it's public pressure and organizations such as, um, such
as yourselves, who should be putting the pressure on
to change behavior via the banks to get, uh,
farmers out of the industries in which,
or to change the way in which they are, uh,
operating those industries rather than the regulators,
rather than the government and its agencies?
Um, not exactly.
I'm saying that there are, it could be either. Mm-hmm.
It's often both, right?
So if we look at things like,
like transitioning away from battery cages, for example, um,
that started decades ago with, with, you know,
raising awareness of the issues, for example,
with things like SPCA, putting a badge on free range eggs
so you can identify them, you know, all that kind
of thing happened over a long period of time.
Um, and eventually,
once there was some investment in systems, you know,
then we start looking at, um, well then the,
the public really starts, starts pressuring
for bans or things like that.
Um, so I guess, you know, if you're interfering on that with
that first part of the shift, you know, I, I think it,
it just creates this risk
that's gonna be more dis actually more disruptive
or difficult for industry.
So, second part of the question is,
you mentioned in your submission, uh, that, um,
I find it there, um, uh,
while it's aimed the bills aimed maybe to ensure fairness
and financial services,
it would inadvertently prevent institutions from responding
to evidence-based ESG risks.
Mm-hmm. Um, so I guess my question to you is understanding
that issue of fairness, um, banks are gonna make judgements,
which, um, on, you know,
what represents a an ESG risk and what doesn't?
Um, is there a better way of writing this so
that we can actually target the things which are
possibly the banks are doing things they shouldn't be doing,
as opposed to things they po possibly should be doing?
Because I'm not hearing anybody say there's a problem,
that there's not a problem that needs to be addressed.
I'm saying people just saying they don't like the
wording. Mm-hmm.
So not being an expert on banking, uh,
but my understanding is that banks
and businesses are already required
to consider financial risks, for example.
Um, and that, uh, from our perspective seems
to make sense already, right?
Because animal welfare is potentially a financial risk.
Um, so, so the way things are now, I guess, is, is, um,
seems all right to us.
Thank you, Marie. And, um, thank you Dr.
Anya for your, uh,
submission this morning. Appreciate it. Mm-hmm.
Thank you. Thank you. Uh, we're gonna go now to, uh,
Lance Wing, Lance Wigs, uh, for a personal submission.
Good morning. Can you hear me? Welcome,
Lance, we've got, yeah, we, I can, we've got you
for five minutes, but of course, leave some time
for some questions if you can.
Thanks a lot. Um, so my name is Lance Wicks, as you said.
I'm a venture capital investor.
Um, but my first four years, uh, of, uh,
my career were actually oil with mobile oil in New Zealand.
I've experienced in mining, refining, uh, across the world,
banking, high tech, uh,
in recently investing in governments governance.
And really, there were three things I wanted
to, to get across.
Um, sort of on top of the submission.
Uh, the first is, uh, around the amount
of money we, we could lose.
Uh, the second is, uh, around the opportunity, uh,
that we are kind of avoiding.
And the third is, um, about, you know, why we are here,
I guess, uh, as venture capital investor, we look
for long-term trends, right?
We're looking for the future. We're looking for things
that are highly disruptive, that allow us to make lots
of unrealistically high returns, um,
which is what our sector's all about.
Uh, we, uh, we are,
we raise money from our investors subject to a mandate.
Uh, and that mandate says what we will
and will not invest in.
Uh, and our investors include the folks covered
by this bill banks, financial institutions,
and the New Zealand government itself
as an investor in the VC sector.
Uh, and if you don't have these policies,
socially responsible investment policies
and the ilk, then you will fail to be able
to raise money from, uh, many domestic investors and,
and particular overseas investors.
So it really exposes what, what might affect only a part
of the investment ecosystem over here does expose a much
greater part of the ecosystem when you start cascading down.
And so those mandates are a necessary requirement for,
uh, us to be able to raise money.
Uh, the, this is about money.
So if you are allocating funds to, uh, sectors
of the economy that, uh, in quotes bad, then you are going
to get not just lower returns, uh,
but probably more importantly, you're gonna get lawsuits
because if you are forced to invest into things
that perhaps aren't as good, uh, though those things are,
uh, subject to, um, catastrophic failure in the future,
either through losing their societal license to operate
or through, um, you know, finally getting
to come up in terms of, uh, the cost of, uh,
the bad tonalities that they've been creating.
And you, rather than sort of think about the,
now think about the history of cigarettes, of weapons
of slave labor, things like that.
Um, and even of, uh, lead
and gasoline, uh, which you, we, we all sought to, uh, to,
to fight successfully and got rid of.
And so the, the issue is that if you tell people what to do,
and this is what's interesting about this bill,
you're telling people what to do.
The, the result is that you own the, that decision.
And so the New Zealand government
and the people of New Zealand are ultimately the ones
that will be blamed, uh, when things go badly.
And that's going to end up in court and it cost to us all.
And the final thing is really, um, about the opportunity
or the second thing, um, this morning I read
that Chinese companies have placed more in, um,
in 2020 $4 into clean tech manufacturing across the world.
And FDI, then the USA placed into the Marshall Plan
in post World War ii, since 2022,
they've done 225 plus billion dollars in pledges versus
200 billion in the Marshall Plan in 2020 $4.
Those are going into batteries, battery materials,
charging infrastructure, electric buses, motorcycles, cars,
solar storage, that sort of stuff.
The AL plan was the USA's response to the devastation
of the manufacturing sector in Europe
and World War II that led to, you know, decades
of lasting peace prosperity.
China's investment is decoupling countries from oil books.
We do about $10 million a year
and turns them from foreign importers into, you know, new,
uh, economies that can actually export these components
of clean energy and manufacturing.
I talk about this 'cause that's the opportunity
that we're avoiding by focusing on the past,
and we should be looking at the fridge at the future.
Oil exporters have a lot to lose,
and that is why ultimately when you look in into,
into builds like this, somewhere along the way,
there's been, uh, you know,
these older industries have been lobbying for looking
for these sorts of bills to try
and slow down that change over.
And that change over switches us from, as I said,
being importers of energy into being creators
and exporters of energy and,
and things aluminum, which has got energy contained.
This is overall destruction.
I'd really like to see the bill not progress
and the government focus on unleashing the
economy in other ways. Thank you.
Thanks Lance. We've actually gone over time,
but we are ahead of schedule.
So I will take a question from Ingrid Leary.
Thank you very much. Uh, you've mentioned that
New Zealand taxpayers could be exposed
in terms of accountability.
Does that come with a financial risk?
The second part is what do you say about people
who characterize this as a woke bill?
Given everything you've said about the history of production
and, uh, the public sentiment?
Um, the financial risk is very much
to the New Zealand government.
We would be, uh, sued as the people in government
of New Zealand because we are forced, um, let's,
let's use again an old example.
If you forced companies to invest in lead gasoline, uh,
lead in gasoline objectively makes people dumb kids dump,
um, that's why it was removed.
Um, and if you forced, uh, the,
if the government forced banks to actually finance, uh,
you know, the manufacturer of ticket with, um, then um,
that company is going to get sued
and the bank would at the very least lose their money.
But the bank would turn around and say, well,
we were made to do it by the government.
And so that lawsuit would go up to the government.
And yes, you can try and protect yourself from that,
but then you're going into international sphere as well
and you can start getting some very big players saying,
I don't really wanna do business in New Zealand.
So there'd be quite a few financial impacts of this.
Is this a woke bill? I think I, the only people
that use the word woke, uh, the people who, uh,
fighting this thing called woke,
I'm not even sure what it is.
I know the source of the word.
It was, uh, African Americans talking
about have you woken up?
Um, but it was quite a long time ago
and it's been sort oft taken on weaponized in other ways.
What I look for are great investments
and what we're trying to avoid lousy investments.
And this bill has unfortunately trying
to tilt the balance into more allows investments
and away from brand investments.
Hey, thank you Lance. Uh, we have met time.
Appreciate you making this submission today.
Thank you very much. Alright,
we're moving now to Jen
Olson. Welcome, Jen.
Oh, thank you. We've got
You for five minutes. Uh,
so for, feel free to leave a bit of time
for questions at the end of your submission.
Okay, thank you. Oh, well, thank you. Um, yeah, hang on.
I'm just gonna try and bring up my, my submission, uh,
called Jen Olson Towa.
Hello everyone. My name is Jen Olson
and, um, thanks for this opportunity and thank you Lance.
I'm really pleased to hear someone on what I often think of
as the opposite side from me.
Um, agreeing now I oppose this bill.
Um, I am, I'm a citizen of New Zealand,
a retired community support worker,
and I'm opposing this bill on the grounds
of social responsibility.
Um, I care about social justice
and I love our beautiful environment.
For me, the climate
and ecological emergency is the most pressing issue facing
us and the whole world Right now we are living on the brink
of a climate and ecological catastrophe.
We know that failing to reduce emissions
of greenhouse gases will result in a level of global warming
that threatens the very survival of society.
And we know that the main problem is the burning
of fossil fuels.
Yet governments have been unable to act decisively
and it has been left to protest groups to raise the alarm
and attempt to shift public government
and corporate opinion.
Um, I believe that the right
to protest is a fundamental element of democracy
and the ability of citizens to express their views
and apply public pressure to governments, businesses,
and banks on important issues is, is essential.
People are increasingly realizing
that corporate decision making is not always in
the public interest.
Regarding profit as the first priority has led
to allow harm to people and the environment, oh, sorry.
I think my dog jumped up just then and disconnected.
That's right. We can still hear you there. You're back.
Oh good. Oh, hang on. Sorry about this.
Um, I've got a puppy in.
I was hoping she'd just sit quietly. What was I saying?
Yeah. Um, yeah.
Pub profit as the first priority has led corporations
to allow harm to the environment to be relegated
to an externality of their businesses.
And this damage then has to be addressed by governments,
councils, and communities who are left
with contaminated waterways or nitrate drinking water,
or in the case of fossil fuels, the results of storms,
flooding, droughts, and fires.
Yes, financial services are essential to modern business
and services offered to businesses
that many people find abhorrent, such as manufacturing,
landmines and
and services that would be generally accepted as harmful,
such as tobacco, fossil fuel production, and deforestation.
New Zealanders have shown their desire to ensure
that their investments are made ethically.
Uh, 2024 report from National Capital found
that 39% of KiwiSaver investment was in ethical providers
and Kiwi saver providers overall had reduced their
investment in harmful companies.
Public pressure has encouraged banks
to end investments in fossil fuels.
Public pressure has given us many examples of success
after initial opposition and Arto
and New Zealand has shown itself to be on the right side
of history in opposing apartheid in South Africa
and nuclear testing in the Pacific.
At this time, every person of conscience
who cares about the children's future, the future
for our Pacific neighbors
and a livable future for our planet must take a stand
against investment in fossil fuels.
We can do this by applying pressure to organizations
that provide financial services to fossil fuel companies
because they care about their public image
and they know that these investments are rapidly losing
their social license as just being pointed out.
This bill is a direct attempt to subvert real democracy
and prevent people in organizations
of conscience from taking action
to reduce harm to the world.
It deliberately plays into the hands of corporations
that have knowingly caused untold harm
and it demonstrates
how easily we could end up on the wrong side of history.
I haven't even mentioned financial services linked
to the wars in Ghana.
I'm sorry, Jen, if you'd just like
to make some closing comments 'cause we are meeting time.
Ah, okay.
Uh, this, I, as far as I understand it,
this bill is specifically intended
to prevent ethical decision making on banking
and investment, and it should be resisted in the
strongest possible terms.
I urge the committee
to reject this bill in its entirety. Thank you.
Thank you, Jen. Very, very clear submission
and supported by your puppy.
Yes. Um, we
Have room now. We've got some peace.
Yeah, well done, but we
haven't met time, but thanks again. Thank
You. We
are gonna welcome Gray. Eat well now.
Are you there Gray?
I am here. Good day Gray. Um, we can hear you.
Yes, you can hear me. I don't know
what to do for you to see me. You got
A video? Have you got a video
function? That
My video? Oh yeah,
that's it. Okay. Sorry about that.
Welcome Gray. Hey, can I suggest you've,
you've done quite a, a fulsome submission here, uh,
but you've only got five minutes, so sort I sort of yeah.
Suggest you take it as red
and really just make a couple of key points
and allow some time for
Yeah. Okay then. Thank
you very much. Yeah.
Well my emphasis is, is on, uh, uh, customer
or consumer protections with the banking industry per se.
Um, I'd just like to comment initially that, uh,
Andy Foster, when he, he commended the, this bill
to the house, he said, suffice to say
that there are is a lot
of concern about the behavior of our banks.
He went on to say,
but the question that this bill is all, uh,
what this bill is all about, whether it's right for banks
and other financial institutions
to make decisions on non-commercial grounds
when it's environmental, moral or cultural.
My emphasis is on the moral issues relating to
the way customers are, um, um, are left out on the cold.
There's no compliance enforcement
and, um, I'm mostly concentrating
as you see from my submission on the fact
that the banking already exists.
Therefore, I'll leave it at that end. Uh, I'll ask this.
There are any questions, please.
Thank you. Great.
Uh, we've got, first up, Ingrid. Larry,
Hi. Could you just please
extrapolate on why,
why you are picking out moral
and are you saying that basically, um, that
the customer has no kind of sovereignty if there isn't
an ability to mitigate moral harm?
Is that your contention? Can you just explain that please?
Well, I can I explain that I use the, the moral I've taken
that extrapolated that from the statement particularly
because, um, the moral obligations of state to,
to the public and in the banking industry, there is a,
as a chain and through the banker's inquiry that's been
before this committee, um, there's clearly a lot of issues
where the, uh, a customer
or consumer of banking products, uh, is not unable
to achieve any, uh, effective remedies through the system.
And that's what I'm insisting that needs
to happen in this instance.
Thank you. Uh, Dr. David Wilson.
Uh, thank you Gray. Uh, just one question.
Do you believe that it is the responsibility of banks
or government to put the policies in place around any
of these moral judgements?
Clearly it is the obligation of the state, the government,
um, you know, I, the line I'm coming in from is
with a long experience of, uh, failures of the system
to provide effective remedies for people who have issues
with the banking industry.
This bill has largely been focused on de banking and the,
and the right to have a banking account.
And my, my submission
and my past submissions, uh, are founded on the fact
that this situation has been denied,
Uh, anti foster.
Thanks, gray. Um, the question is that we've had a number
of submitters, uh, before you dunno if you heard them,
but, um, number of submitters sort
of saying banks should have the right
to make decisions on ESG grounds that would see, uh,
the intention of this, uh, bill is that that's fine.
Provided they, they can make the case that
that ESG risk is also a financial risk to the bank.
Is that a reasonable approach?
And if it is not a financial risk to the bank,
they're just making it for some other reason, um,
that would be slightly problematic.
Yes, Andy, my, my experience would tell me
that the banks often make decisions
that are neither commercial.
Uh, they are a, um, a, a system of controlling the customers
by, um, you know, uh, I use the term inventing risk
and I just see that the,
the banks leaning towards this particular environmental
issue is simply seeking another opportunity to create risks,
to charge the customers more money.
And, um, my concern
as I'm saying is where's the compliance enforcement to,
to protect the customers.
So the ability to be able to say to a bank that, um,
either doesn't provide services
or, um, seeks to provide them at a greater rate, um,
there should be some mechanism to be able to challenge them.
Absolutely. And You think that
mechanism's not adequate at the moment?
Absolutely. It's not, I mean, it's been proven
through the fund debt mediation bill, for example, that, um,
that that whole process and,
and I'm very aware of what is, uh, intentions were,
but the process itself is not really being used to, to,
shall we say, remedy a problem with a banking,
with a banking, a customer and or bank.
Um, normally it is just another method
of winding a a business up
and that is not what that was intended to do.
Thank you. Excellent. Great.
Thank you for a fulsome, uh, written submission
and sharing your answers with us this morning.
Appreciate it.
Yeah, thank you very much. Uh, members, we've got a,
um, a no show
and a bit of a gap, so we'll break now till 10 o'clock at
which time we're hearing from Westpac.
So we'll see you in about, um, 9 59,
if that's alright to log back on.
We'll stay on but just switch off. Thank you.